docs: add cluster api migration docs (#737)
elastisys/compliantkubernetes: docs/user-guide/cluster-api.md

# Cluster API

!!!note

>     Our packaging of Cluster API is not publicly available yet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Our packaging of Cluster API is being rolled out and is not available in all environments.
```

>     Elastsiys Managed service customers are using a version of this platform that is based on Kubespray, but our aim will be to migrate everyone to Cluster API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Most Elastisys Managed Service customers are using a version of this platform that is based on Kubespray.
    Elastisys will eventually migrate everyone to Cluster API.
```

    There is no exact schedule for this migration yet, more information will be provided later.
    If you have any questions then contact our support.

> This document aims to show what changes to expect as an Application developer using Compliant Kubernetes when running on Cluster API instead of Kubespray.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This document aims to show what changes to expect as an Application Developer using Compliant Kubernetes when running on Cluster API instead of Kubespray.
```

## What is Cluster API

[Cluster API](https://cluster-api.sigs.k8s.io/) is a project that provides declarative APIs and tools to provision, upgrade and operate Kubernetes clusters.
It works using Kubernetes objects that describe the state (cluster) you want and operators that tries to reconcile the actual state to the desired state.

> This means it's very similar to how one normally works with `Pods` and other resources in Kubernetes, e.g. one can use a `MachineDeployment` to provision Kubernetes nodes (`Machines`) in a similar way that one can use `Deployments` to provision `Pods`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means it's very similar to how one normally works with `Pods` and other resources in Kubernetes, e.g. one can use a `MachineDeployment` to provision Kubernetes nodes (`Machines`) in a similar way that one can use `Deployments` to provision `Pods`.

Application Developers don't need a full understanding of Cluster API.
However, Compliant Kubernetes running with Cluster API has a few implications, which Application Developers need to be aware of, as described below.
```

## Node replacement

> Cluster API will often replace nodes instead of modifying them as part of different operations, such as upgrading the kubernetes version or resizing a node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Cluster API will often replace Nodes instead of modifying them as part of different operations, such as upgrading the Kubernetes version or resizing a node.
```

> This means that you should not expect individual Kubernetes nodes to stay in the cluster and things like node names and IPs will change.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means that you should not expect individual Kubernetes Nodes to stay in the Cluster.
Node names and IP addresses will change.
```

But you can rely on nodes keeping the same size and any predefined labels (labels that are set across a group of nodes).

> For clusters that are spread out across zones you can also rely on the new nodes being spread out across zones in the same way.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For Clusters that are spread out across zones you can also rely on the new Nodes being spread out across zones in the same way.
```

## Egress traffic source IP

Kubernetes nodes provisioned with Cluster API will by default only have a private IP address.
This means that egress traffic will be NATed via the cloud provider which in turn currently removes the possibility to allowlist traffic from specific Kubernetes nodes in external services based on the source IP that the external service will see.

All ingress traffic will go through load balancers and there will not be any major differences for the ingress traffic.

!!!note
    We will look into the possibility of getting a stable egress IP for application developers that really need it.

## Cluster autoscaling

Cluster API opens up the possibility of having cluster autoscaling that automatically adds and removes nodes from a cluster based on the usage.

> The autoscaler will scale up a cluster if there are pending pods that currently cannot be scheduled because of a lack of resources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The autoscaler will scale up a cluster if there are pending Pods that currently cannot be scheduled because of a lack of resources.
```

> This means that the scaling is based on resource requests on pods, not actual CPU/memory utilization.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means that the scaling is based on resource requests on Pods, not actual CPU/memory utilization.
```

So the autoscaler will not prevent nodes from running out of CPU or memory if the resource requests are not close to the actual usage.

> The autoscaler will scale down a cluster if there are plenty of unrequested resources for a longer period of time.

Author: Looks like it's 10min based on this https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler/blob/master/cluster-autoscaler/FAQ.md#how-does-scale-down-work
Would you want me to link to that document as well for more info about how both scale up and scale down works?

> The autoscaler will scale down a cluster if there are plenty of unrequested resources for a longer period of time.

Reviewer: I feel if you add "10 minutes", then the description of both scale up and scale down is sufficient.

Would you agree @llarsson ?

> # Cluster API

Reviewer 2: We have Kubespray in the architecture diagrams. Should we update those images as part of this PR, @cristiklein and @lucianvlad?

Reviewer: Let's do it later when at least 50% of the environments run on top of Cluster API.

Author: I also think we can wait with the diagrams

It works using Kubernetes objects that describe the state (Cluster) you want and operators that tries to reconcile the actual state to the desired state.
This means it's very similar to how one normally works with `Pods` and other resources in Kubernetes, e.g. one can use a `MachineDeployment` to provision Kubernetes Nodes (`Machines`) in a similar way that one can use `Deployments` to provision `Pods`.

Application Developers don't need a full understanding of Cluster API.
However, Compliant Kubernetes running with Cluster API has a few implications, which Application Developers need to be aware of, as described below.

## Node replacement

Cluster API will often replace Nodes instead of modifying them as part of different operations, such as upgrading the Kubernetes version or resizing a Node.
This means that you should not expect individual Kubernetes Nodes to stay in the Cluster.
Node names and IP addresses will change.
But you can rely on Nodes keeping the same size and any predefined labels (labels that are set across a group of Nodes).

> For Clusters that are spread out across zones you can also rely on the new Nodes being spread out across zones in the same way.

Author: I thought that we maybe sometimes let customers add labels, but it seems like we just sometimes add labels that customers ask us to add. So then it should be less of a problem. From what I remember those labels are used to sort of create node groups so that they can control which node their stuff will run on.

So while it is correct to write it like we have, I agree that it opens up questions that might just confuse. I'm open to simplifying it to just say that sizes and labels will be the same.

> For Clusters that are spread out across zones you can also rely on the new Nodes being spread out across zones in the same way.

Author: I wrote an updated text with a simplified text about labels, PTAL

## Egress traffic source IP

Kubernetes Nodes provisioned with Cluster API will by default only have a private IP address.

> This means that egress traffic will be NATed via the cloud provider which in turn currently removes the possibility to allowlist traffic from specific Kubernetes Nodes in external services based on the source IP that the external service will see.

Author: What you wrote here is unfortunately not really true, at least not on all clouds.
I asked Elastx how outbound traffic works for servers without a public IP. They said that they cannot guarantee any specific IP and that traffic from one of their IPs might come from several different projects. So this is not good for app devs that want to allow list traffic in external services.

> This means that egress traffic will be NATed via the cloud provider which in turn currently removes the possibility to allowlist traffic from specific Kubernetes Nodes in external services based on the source IP that the external service will see.

Author: I now know that we do get a stable IP at cleura based on the IP of the router in the network.

## Node replacement

Cluster API will often replace Nodes instead of modifying them as part of different operations, such as upgrading the Kubernetes version or resizing a Node.
This means that you should not expect individual Kubernetes Nodes to stay in the Cluster.

Node **names and IP addresses** _**will**_ change as the Nodes are replaced.

However, you can rely on the new replacement Nodes to be functionally equivalent to the old ones:

- Any attached storage to application Pods will (as per usual Kubernetes behavior) move to the new Nodes.
- Replacement Nodes will have the same size and any predefined labels.

For Clusters that are spread out across zones you can also rely on the new Nodes being spread out across zones in the same way.

## Egress traffic source IP

Kubernetes Nodes provisioned with Cluster API will by default only have a private IP address.
This means that egress traffic will use Network Address Translation (NAT) via the cloud provider, similar to how home networks behind a router work.
In turn, this removes the possibility to allowlist traffic from specific Kubernetes Nodes in external services based on the source IP that the external service will see.

> We cannot guarantee that the IP the external services sees is stable over time.
> It Also might not be exclusive for your Compliant Kubernetes environment, so traffic from that IP could originate from other servers that is not related to your environment.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Depending on the underlying cloud infrastructure provider and their features, we cannot guarantee that the IP the external services sees is stable over time.
Also depending on underlying cloud infrastructure, the IP might also not be exclusive for your Compliant Kubernetes environment, so traffic from that IP could originate from other servers that is not related to your environment.
```

Reviewer 2: How about this, to show that it's basically out of our control in the general case? :thinking:

Author: That looks good :+1:
